Hello welcome back to the course on statistics to day.
We've got a very exciting topic.
Statistical significance and it's very exciting because I know that from my experience from my career
it's a question that is always asked or at least you ask yourself this question is Marisol statistically
significant or not.
Or are these insights statistically significant or not.
And if you don't understand the significance then it's a question that you read from your manager or
the person you're poring to because you cannot substantiate your results you found some stuff but you
don't know if it's right or wrong.
And in this section we're going to be exploring this concept in a lot of detail and we're going to be
referencing it a lot and you will get a great understanding.
Hopefully you'll be able to build a strong understanding of statistical significance.
However in this tutorial what we're going to focus on is in on the intuition Behi statistical significance
of what how you can link how you feel about an experiment to one actually statistical significance is.
So let's have a look.
All right so here we have gone experiment a coin toss.
I know it's always a coin toss but a coin toss is.
In all fairness a great example to get started with because it is so simple.
There's only two possible outcomes and you're already done this so many times in your life that you
know what to expect and that's why it will help us build intuition.
So there are two possible versions or two possible situations.
Kind of like we're going to start talking about hypothesis testing right now.
We're not talking about hypothesis testing we're thinking about two possible alternative universes if
you will if you want to put it that way.
So one possible universe is that in that universe it's a fair coin in that scenario in that environment.
But probably I like the way to put it as in that universe so in that universe that is a fair coin.
So that's that's our original assumption as far as age zero that's the null hypothesis that we are starting
off with.
And then one is the alternative universe or the alternative hypothesis.
Sometimes also called H A.
And in this universe this is not a fair point.
So we want to understand which universe do we live in or which situation or are we actually dealing
with or what is the truth.
That's what we're trying to assess is it a fair coin is the null hypothesis correct.
Or is it not a fair going and then the alternative hypothesis is correct.
And so the way we're going to go about this is we're going to assume that a zero or the null hypothesis
is true.
So again to assume that we live in the first universe and then based on our experiment we're going to
see if we can contradict that if we can come to a contradiction and say oh actually our assumption was
incorrect and we'll talk more about that at towards the end of this tutorial.
But for now let's assume that you've got a coin that you're tossing that some or somebody is going to
toss just now and you're assuming it's a fair coin.
We live in that universe.
So the coin is tossed the first time and the result is tails.
The question is how do you feel about this figure.
Forget about those statistics for a second.
How do you feel about this do you feel that this is a fair coin or that the coin is rigged.
You probably feel that it is likely a fair coin.
This is a totally probable outcome in that universe that we have assumed we live in in the Age 0 universe
the probability of that is 50 percent.
So it could have been has could have been tails no problem.
Then the coin is tossed a second time and tails again.
How do you feel about this now.
Do you feel that the coin is rigged.
Or do you feel that is a fair point.
Well let's look at the possibility of this happening in our universe that we're living in in the Age
0 hypothesis.
The probability of that happening if this is a fair coin is 25 percent.
So no big deal could happen then the coin is tossed again and again it's tails.
OK so what how do you feel about that now.
What do you feel about having three coins.
Three times the same coin is tossed and you get every single time it's tails.
Well you know it might be a bit a bit suspicious but it's fairly OK because in our universe in which
we live in in the age zero universe where the coin is assumed to be fair this could have happened and
the probability of that happening is 12 percent.
But then that coin is tossed again.
And guess what.
It's tails again.
All right so are you getting a bit suspicious now.
Do you feel that if this were a fair coin this would be quite hard for this to happen.
Well in the universe we assume we live in in age zero universe where the null hypothesis is assumed
to be true or will the new proposed is true and we assume we're in that universe.
Well in that case this could have happened with a ruler of 6 percent.
All right.
And then the coin is tossed again and again it is tails.
Now how do you feel about it.
How do you feel about seeing somebody toss a coin and then getting tails every single time.
Times in a row well you feel a bit.
Correct me if I'm wrong but I I'm assuming you feel a bit uneasy about that that you feel that something
might be going on here something is a bit not right.
It's a bit suspicious that this coin is has had tails five times in a row.
And your feeling is correct your feeling is natural because the probability of this happening if we
assume that it is a fair coin the probability of this happening is only 3 percent.
So if we assume that we live in a universe where the null hypothesis is true where the coin is a fair
coin we would have only seen this if likelihood of 3 percent meaning that you'd have to watch this experiment
on 33 different occasions like you watch it today you watch it tomorrow you're watching another day.
You don't have to watch it on 33 different days or 33 different times.
This experiment of five quintals would have to be conducted only once you would see the results so it's
a very low probability.
And that's why you're feeling of this is something something's going on here is completely valid completely
justified.
But then let's see what happens.
The coin is tossed again and this time it's yes what's tails again.
I know you are probably expecting heads.
Now it's tails again.
What do you think is going on here.
How do you feel about this going do you feel that it is still a fair coin to feel that our assumption
that it's a fair coin is correct or do you feel uneasy about that assumption.
Do you feel that something might be suspicious here.
And if you feel that something is suspicious here you are again very well just right even more so than
previously because of that happening is about 1 percent 1 percent only.
And then what is going on here is that the probability of this happening is dropping as you get more
and more tails.
And in terms of the Scorsone further down we'll be operating with the term P-value.
In fact we've already seen P-value is when we looked at the score table previously when we were looking
up the Zed's scores well in that table in the middle what you have is actually a P-value.
So you can see that the P-value is dropping that simply the probability of this happening given that
we are in a universe where the null hypothesis is true.
And this is very important to understand that if we're in this universe this universe then this is what
the P-value looks like.
It's very unlikely that you'll get six tails in a row.
However if you think about it for a second if we were in this universe where it's not a fair coin whereas
for example it's a weighted coin or both sides of the coin are tails that if you have a comment like
that if we are in this universe then these values will be completely different it wouldn't be like this.
The P-value would be 100 percent 100 percent 100 percent 100 percent higher and higher.
And so in if we lived in the second universe we wouldn't get that feeling we wouldn't get suspicious
over here.
We're even more suspicious over here.
We would totally be comfortable of this because we know that the coin has two tails on each side there's
a tails on the coin and therefore we would be totally comfortable with one.
1 tails in a row or two tails in a row three four or five six thousand or so we wouldn't get any uneasy
feeling about it if we lived in this universe.
However the way hypothesis testing works is that we assume we live in this universe over here at the
top.
The null hypothesis universe and then we want to see will we get whatever our experiment is.
Will we get uneasy and uneasy feeling about it and this uneasy feeling in mathematical terms.
You can't just come up to your boss and say or your manager or your client you can just go and say I
had an uneasy feeling about this.
I don't think it's true.
Of course you have to put in mathematical terms and that's where statistical significance comes in.
So statistical significance is basically this line over here is simple is that 5 percent.
So that's where you started getting this uneasy feeling just as just after the 6 percent you started
being very suspicious about things going on.
And that's about right.
That's because as soon as something is 5 percent less likely to happen that's the alpha here then that
is like 5 percent is like 1 out of 20 so that's when we draw the line we say OK so that is it's so unlikely.
I am so unlikely to see this by random.
That's I'm going to reject this null hypothesis.
I'm going to say that because I'm seeing this and it was so unlikely to happen at random.
This cannot be true.
And that's where you say that I'm confident I'm rejecting this hypothesis of 95 percent confidence that
I'm 95 percent sure that we don't live in this universe.
There's a 5 percent chance that we do.
But I'm 95 percent sure that we don't live in this universe.
I'm going to reject that hypothesis and I'm going to state that we live in a universe where this going
is actually correct.
And you can set this confidence level to whatever you like.
You can set it to 10 percent and you'd be rejecting over a year.
You can set it to one percent you're going to be rejecting here so it depends on your experiment.
Most of the time 95 is a good level to go with but sometimes especially in medical trials and things
like that where people's lives depend on that the results or the confirmation or not confirmation or
like there is whether or not we reject the whole hypothesis.
In those cases you might want to sometimes require that you said it tonight and so depends on your experiment
and on your on what you're doing with those results.
But generally speaking this is what's descale significance all about it's the point where in human intuitive
terms you get uneasy about the null hypothesis being true and you get super suspicious about it in mathematical
terms is just where you draw the line and you say OK I have enough confidence or like this a sufficient
level of confidence for me to reject the null hypothesis.
So I actually I'm going to state that we live in this alternate universe.
So there we go that's kind of the back of the intuition behind hypothesis testing and we'll we'll actually
talk more about hypothesis testing intuition further down and throw out these tutorials.
But more importantly this was a tutorial on the intuition behind statistical significance.
And as you go through these tutorials what I encourage you to focus on is to develop a gut feel for
statistical significance.
So it's one thing to run to calculate the formulas write out the equations and understand if something
sophistical statistically significant or not statistically significant.
But at the same time it's an additional benefit if throughout this tutorials you kind of think about
what we're talking about here that you don't just run the calculations and do the mathematical side
of things.
Also think about it from an intuitive perspective.
Think about it.
Do you feel uneasy about those numbers do you feel as something suspicious is going on or not and then
see what the mathematics tells you.
And that way you will be able to slowly but surely develop this gut feel for statistical significance
and sometime in the future in your career you'll be easier for you to apply these things and just look
at a problem and without even doing the math not have an answer right away but at least have some ideas
of where this all can go and whether or not this problem is likely to be or this conclusion is likely
to be statistically significant or not and especially beneficial when or if you already or when you
become like a manager if that's your goal or like a an executive because you want sometimes you just
don't have the time to write those things out.
But you can look at results that are being presented to you and you can assess those things in you know
your mind very quickly.
So there you go.
Hope you enjoyed this tutorial statistical significance and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.